Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopton today
I'm joined by Doctor David Wolpert. He's professor at
the Santa Fe Institute. Most of his work is
in thermodynamics or computation, foundations of physics, dynamics of
social. Organizations, machine learning game theory, and distributed optimization
slash control. And today we're going to focus on
a paper of his titled The Past as a
stochastic Process. So, Doctor Wolpert, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure to be here. Very good to
meet you and everybody else online. Yeah.
So, just to introduce the topic, what is a
stochastic process?
Hm, OK. So, um, a deterministic process is something
that is governed, for example, by a differential equations.
Um, IT is something where the state of a
system right now and this, um, uh, definition of
state might be somewhat elaborate, but the state of
the system right now uniquely defines its future trajectory.
There is no randomness at all. So, um, the
idea of physics is that at the very foundation
of physics, if you have a closed system, so
it's isolated from the outside world, it is completely
deterministic. If I were to tell you right now
the precise positions of all the planets in the
solar system, And the sun, along with their masses
and their velocities, and the, um, if there were
no gas to sort of add some randomness, then
I could tell you the positions and velocities of
the planets millions of years into the future. Everything
is deterministic. It's bang, bang bang. Um, A stochastic
process is the general, well, formerly in mathematics, what
the term refers to is A general um uh
mathematical structure that allows us to talk about trajectories
into the future that, um, do not have that
characteristic that they're all bang bang deterministic. There is
inherent randomness. So, to give a simple example from
the foundations of physics, um, if there were to
be a quantum mechanical effects. That um have any
kind of implication for the trajectory of the system
we're interested in, then we have a stochastic process
going into the future. But also more generally, if
I don't have a system so precisely isolated from
all other variables, and it's so small and easy
to consider like the plants in the solar system,
then we as humans. Phenomenologically it's a simple matter
of practice. Um, CANNOT avoid having stochasticity in all
of our, um, uh, predictions about the future process.
Um, WHAT are the stock markets going to be
tomorrow? What's the weather going to be in one
week? What's going to happen with the new power
in the United States starting up today? What are
the implications for the whole geopolitical system within a
month? Things like this. These all have somewhat randomness,
um, uh, some degree of randomness, and also that
randomness can grow. So in the most general sense,
a stochastic process is a mathematics. That allows us
to deal with, allows us to analyze and investigate
and make predictions using such stochastic processes.
So, but we're going to focus on the history
specifically here, which is what you do in your
paper. So what kinds of methodologies do you apply
when studying history?
OK, yeah. So, um, for example, if we were
predicting the future, that question about the geopolitical situation
one month from now. Um, SO, History, so in
the, in the papers you're referring to of mine,
of mine and many others, um, we are considering
what's called deep history over very, very long time
spans, um, phenomenology that applies to all civilizations. So
the amazing thing. Um, THIS was developed, um, originally
by about a group of about 50 archaeologists, um,
something called the Seshat data set. Seat was an
Egyptian god of, I forget what, to be quite
honestly. Um, AND what it is, is a recording
over um century intervals, so the year 100, the
year 200, the year 300, of about 50 different
characteristics of A human society at about 30 or
40 different locations on all planets all over the
world. And so it's a massive data set. It
was a huge undertaking. The reason that so many
different archaeologists and anthropologists and historians were involved, was
because they had to all agree on a common
set of standards for measuring these 50 variables. What
they found astonishing, it, it almost can't be true,
but it is, is that all civilizations across all
time, all human cultures, there are very, very striking
clear trends in these time series data sets. All
civilizations, all humans do the same kinds of things
over intervals of century to century. Where we're talking
at the level of big um uh geopolitical societies,
things like Latium, the uh plain of uh Rome,
things like the um uh plain um that had
uh um Kyoto, um. ERA Japan, things like um
Mesoamerica, the Mayans, things like this, the um uh
the um uh Khmer civilization, the Mekong Delta, the
Mekong Rivers, those were all the geopolitical regions and
the societies that existed there over these time scales
followed these very striking trends. Bizarre. It's almost can't
be true. It's like a joke from some science
fiction movie, a grade B science fiction movie. So
when I first encountered this, me and some of
my collaborators, um, I didn't believe it. I dug
into the statistics of this paper, um, because I
have a background doing machine learning. I've done a
ton of different things in the past. Um, AND,
but I found that, nope, statistics is correct. These
conclusions are valid, but it was a first pass.
There are some subtle things that they had not
looked into, or, or not so subtle, in fact,
some of them. So this is where me and
some of my collaborators, we start to investigate these
phenomena, and we found, for example, the following elaboration.
It turns out that all societies, when they start
going, get getting going, so things like through the
year 500 or so, ancient China, ancient Rome, so
on and so forth, first, they grow in size
without any increase in their ability to perform computation,
where you measure a society, how well it can
do computation. Um, IN terms of things like how
sophisticated is the monetary system, how good is the
transport system, how many levels of bureaucracy, and so
on. At first, every single society grows in size
without any increase in its ability to perform computation,
then it stops growing in size, only increases in
essence, how smart it is until it reaches a
new threshold, and it's the same threshold for all
societies. And then bang, now it can start increasing
in size again. They all do this. So, how
can we measure these things? This is a very
roundabout way of answering your question, but I'm getting
there. How can we um analyze this situation? One
century intervals over say 56 1000 years for about
30 different societies, since these are 50 different variables,
that is a teeny teeny teeny data set. It's
far too small for the dimension of the space
to use some of the standard time series techniques.
You may have heard of things you or your
um uh listeners, your viewers, like what are called
auto regressive models, ARMA models, um, a nonlinear time
series. These are the kinds of things that are
used all over Wall Street and so on. Those
require vastly more data than we have. So, what
we're doing is we're um using some of the
tools from the stochastic process literature. Which allow us
to say that we can view um the um
dynamics of all these societies in this 50 dimensional
space, as though it were just a sum of
two very simple processes. One is a deterministic trajectory.
If my society is here, the deterministic component says
we're going there in the space of characteristics of
the society. But there's also Gaussian noise added to
it. Wherever we end up in one century, that'll
be a new position, so there's a new trajectory
vector, and then we go in that direction where
we add a little bit of noise, Gaussian noise
to that. And we just keep doing this, a
step by step by step where we add noise
at each step. This has many fewer what are
called degrees of freedom, far, far simpler to fit
to the data set, and that's actually what we
um have been considering in things like the paper
that you're referring to, that more recent one, the
past stochastic process. That is the underlying technical tool.
It's called things like if, if anybody wants to
look it up, it's called Fucker Planck um dynamics,
F O K K E R and then Planck
is the um the very, very famous um physicist,
P L A N C K.
So you might have answered partly at least the
question I'm going to ask now, but what is
a stochastic process framework? How does it apply to
the study of history and what can we learn
from it?
Yes, so the, um, what I just gave you
is a simple example of of Farker-Planck dynamics where
you have what's called a veenner process, um W
I N E R. These are all famous. Mathematicians,
scientists from about a century ago, um, where you
have Gaussian, um, noise added to each step. There
are many variations of this basic idea that you
can do, where at each moment, the key feature
of this that makes it so powerful and so
easy to fit even when there's not much data,
is that we are considering only the present. To
figure out where to go next. We're not looking
at the previous time steps as well. There's no
hidden variables with extra memory, like in what are
sometimes called hidden Markov models. We're ignoring all of
that. We're approximating it away. That's what makes it
powerful. And there are things you can do like
you could have the um size of the Gaussian
noise. The characteristics is called of the vener process.
Those could change across your space. You could have
there be a more sophisticated ways of changing this
some uh underlying vector of directions and how it
varies across the space. Your step that you're going
to take and then add a little bit of
noise to how that step, the direction, the size
of that step, how it varies across the space.
You can vary all these kinds of things. What
makes it again so powerful as a tool to
analyze human societies is precisely the fact that you
don't need to know all these earlier um values
of my state. To figure out where I'm going
to go next, I don't need to know where
was I yesterday, the day before, the day before,
and the day before that. In contrast, things like
what are called an auto regressive model or standard
nonlinear time series, you need to know all those
values as well, and that vastly complicates the entire
analysis. So that was, that's what makes it a
good tool. The underlying Philosophy. Is the following. There's
a vast amount of work in social sciences, and
I've done it as well, cause I used to
do a bunch of work in game theory, but,
uh, game theory as a field is kind of
broken, so you can only do so much there.
Um, BUT, uh, the vast majority of social scientists,
including game theory, they are based on introspection. We
all sort of think about, oh, Ricardo, what do
you think are the important issues concerning um how
a society will evolve? Oh, David, if I were
a society, I would be paying attention to, um,
you know, I think people care about the rate
of inflation. OK, that sounds good. Let's put that
in as a variable. And when we're talking about
just person to person interactions, social networks, what do
we think is important? Well, um, uh, my buddy
Ricardo. Do I think that Ricardo, um, is somebody
who was good to me last week? Yeah, he,
you know, he did, he did me some good,
good, good turn last week, so I'm feeling well
to Ricardo right now, so I'm more likely to
give him a little bit of slacker, you know,
whatever it is that I can give. We do
this all based on introspection. We don't do that
for any of the other sciences. If you consider
something like physics or chemistry or biology, it's crucially
all based on observation. You let nature tell you,
the scientists, what is really going on. Um, WHEN
I, uh, in another previous career, I was an
aerospace, um, an aeronautics professor at Stanford. One thing
that I used to say that was, I found
to be so important about doing engineering as opposed
to just pure theory. Is that that provided a
way for nature to tell me what the truth
was rather than me to just introspect and think
how it should go. Nature could take my brilliant,
absolutely beautiful theoretical work, and then when it doesn't
fly, nature turns around and says, so nature can
turn around, I'm a human too. So nature can
turn around. And they can kick me in the
ass, saying, David, you thought you were so smart,
you thought you had it figured out how the
world really is. You're wrong. Your airplane just fell
out of the sky. Go back to the drawing
board, think about it again. This whole body of
work where we just had these 50 variables, that
far more than we would think about in terms
of introspection. These are the ones that have been
found working out in the archaeological field. In this
case, by looking at these flow patterns, these stochastic
processes, going through these spaces of 50 variables, we
are allowing nature to tell us. What is going
on. We can sit here and think, oh, I
would expect that once um my society grows to
be the following size, then it might just keep
on growing. It doesn't have anything to do with
the computational power. No. Nature tells us, that's what's
so important about this new body of work for
analyzing history. It's especially very, very different from the
standard approach in what's called history or historiography, which
is all based upon storytelling, it's narratives. It's the
last refuge. Of people from the 19th century who
did not want to introduce numbers and mathematical reasoning
into our understanding of the way the world works.
That's in many ways, unfortunately, the profession of history.
And this is just blowing that out of the
water, just walk, stepping around, all of that to
let nature tell us what's going on.
And in what ways is history a stochastic process?
Um, BECAUSE the evolution is noisy. As you and
I were discussing, um, at the very beginning of
this interview, we don't know. We can make some
predictions, and they might be likely to be true,
but we don't know what the state of the
world is going to be. Is Ukraine going to,
well, to just sort of speak politically, is Ukraine
going to face reality and actually form a peace
treaty where Putin will get some of the territory
but not have one, or is Ukraine going to
do a battle to the death? What's going to
be happening to the Chinese economy right now? It's
having a lot of difficulty. Is that going to
continue and is it going to actually impede the
possibilities of China, um, slowly taking over the South
China Sea? Um, IS the United States going to
invade Greenland and the Panama Canal? What's going to
happen to NATO? We don't know. These are all
random, so that's the stochasticity. um, IN the stock
market, what's going to happen to the world's stock
markets in, um, in Japan, the Nikkei, in the
US, in Europe, what's going to be happening? These
are all social systems. These are all part of
history. They will go into the history books that
are written about 2025, but it's random, so it
is a stochastic process. That's the key. Everything in
the real world is a sarcastic process because we
cannot model things down at the level of atoms
and molecules, which is what which we would need
to do to actually be able to view it,
model it as a deterministic process.
So as an example in the paper, you talk
about jumps in the socio-political complexity of politics. What
can we learn about them through this framework?
Um, PRECISELY because of the, um, I gave as
an example, maybe it was, I should have waited
until now, these two thresholds, if you look at
If you very roughly decompose the um the dynamics
of the systems in the space of 50 variables
down to two separate variables. One, as I was
mentioning, measuring the computational power of a society, and
one, just its size, how many people are in
your capital city, that kind of thing. So here
is size, here is computational power, trying to get
it right. Um, AND what you would see, there
are very clear thresholds. It's a sawtooth pattern. It
does this. It's not even a sine wave, it's
very sharp, and it's true for all societies. And
so what we have learned, you, I could now,
we could discover a new society somewhere. Figure out
what is its population according to um this measure,
and what is its computational power according to this
measure, we would see, oh, it is right now
in between this jagged tooth and pointing down and
this jagged tooth pointing up. So we could then
predict. Not exactly, but to high accuracy. Its future
is going to be that it will keep on
growing its um computational power until it hits that
spot, and then it will be growing in size
again. We can now do these things looking into
the past. It's amazing. Nobody thought there would be
these kinds of rules. It's almost like Isaac Asimov's
foundation series, but it's all driven purely by the
data rather than by mathematics.
So just a few minutes ago, you talked a
little bit about narrative approaches in the history. Is
a stochastic process framework supposed to replace them or
to complement them?
Compliment, I guess, um, a more. Properly speaking, it's
a very strange thing, the sociology of the sciences
of archaeology, anthropology. And history. Mostly, I guess I'm
talking about the West, um. So what happened was,
everything was very, very quantitative, numerical, um, uh, economics,
um, a whole bunch of the famous, um, economists
from the 19th century were also famous, um, uh,
physicists, for example. And then there was also Darwinism
and the idea that everything is a competition. All
of that is completely accepted. It's true. But there
was a political process in the West. It was
called social Darwinism, eugenics. People misinterpreted, people who were
not scientists, politicians, they had other purposes in mind
of what they wanted to do rather than just
uncover the truth. They um took these insights. And
misunderstood them, misused them just like misinformation. It's, it's
an age-old kind of phenomenon to try to argue
certain races are intrinsically less advanced, they are all
deficient compared to others. Of course, their race, of
course, was the best one, and their country was
the top, and so on and so forth. This
was social Darwinism, this was eugenics, people going so
far as to say that you should. Um, GIVE
rights for having children based upon the intelligence of
the adult. There was then a very, very strong
reaction against this. That reaction, it was very vicious
and it was an overreaction. There's similar things in
the field of biology. There's always overactions and then
overreactions. It's the way these fields very often tend
to go, the ones that have large aspects to
them that are not just mathematics-based. Um, uh, BUT
it was particularly pronounced. Anthropology and archaeology have started
to recover. You can now talk about equations and
so on in those fields for the most part.
History still has not. It's now you will. There
Jokes made about how if you were to go
to the annual meeting of the American Historical Association.
And propose a session on numerical approaches to world
history. There's no way that anybody would even consider
having such a special session. It's just, it's dogmatism,
it's theology. Um, THAT this is not what history
is, and that Thesis is actually very often. Presented
associated with some. Almost moral. Reaction that's to try
to introduce numbers into these kinds of analysis of
human nature is immoral, it's evil. It almost has
that kind of a feel. Nobody says that. But
it, and they might not, nobody that might not
even be conscious, but that is how strong the
reaction can be.
So I have one last question then talking about
the future now and not so much about the
past. Would this sort of framework, a stochastic process
framework also allow us to make accurate predictions about
the future and if so, what kinds of predictions?
Of course, there's a cliche. Prediction is hard, especially
about the future. Um, SO, Yes and no. We
are starting this we as a very broad group
are starting to Bring these analyses up to involving
more recent data sets. The kinds of stuff I
was presented before Seat, it's some successor, which is
called Equinox or many other data sets is what's
called the Human Atlas. Of um I forget what
it is, a human atlas or something or other,
um, the these data sets mostly deal with the
deep past. When you come up closer to the
present, closer to the modern day, the past 500
years, Your problem is no longer not enough data,
it's far too much. Rather than only being able
to um uh record 50 variables, because that's all
that's left in the ground that we can actually
look at, now there are millions, trillions, you know,
billions of variables that you could actually consider. So,
to apply these tools to more modern situations, there
is some work, a lot of it coming out
of the Santa Fe Institute, people like um Hidalgo
and Bernardo Uber and Bernardo um. Uh, I'm blanking
on his name. It'll come to me. Um, THESE
are kinds of people, Housman, Ricardo Hausman, um, these
people are doing certain kinds of analysis along these
lines. Um, THERE'S also work being done by a
fellow called Peter Churchn. Um, THERE'S also me and
some of my other collaborators are starting to try
to, um, analyze more recent data sets. It's a
much more Challenging exercise and analyzing the past because
there's too much data now. There are other issues
as well. In a certain sense, history is speeding
up. So when we were looking at the past,
What was going to be 1000 years of changing
of one particular society in the past can now
happen in like a year, 5 years at most.
It's very, you know, depends who knows how to
precisely measure it, but it's very, very fast because
population densities are so high and so on, and
this has to do with scaling behavior, what are
called nonlinear, um, scaling properties of human cities and
so on, and there. There's a huge amount of
work by people like Luis Bettencourt and Jeff West,
and Chris Campus, other people associated with the Santa
Fe Institute, and also many sociologists who were um
preceded them to actually start analyzing all of these
data sets about super linear scaling. What that means
is that in a very real sense, the speed
of historical changes is faster in large dense cities
than it is. In lower density ones, populations have
been going up, so that's speeding things up. Technologies
are changing very, very quickly. All of these things
mean that what we could worry about for how
accurate the predictions were for 10 or 2 1000
years when looking at the past. Now might be
the only kinds of accuracies we could even hope
to come to for looking into the future for
5 years, except now that we have so many
more variables, so we're not even sure how to
do it. So, long, long-winded answer, but the end
of it is, yes, these different approaches that I've
been talking about. Can be used to make predictions,
geopolitical, um, economic predictions. We are sociopolitical predictions. We
are starting to think about how to do this,
but it is far more challenging, and those predictions
when we do have them, are going to be
far um less certain. They're going to be less
crisp than the ones that we did about the
past.
Great. So, doctor W purchase just before we go,
would you like to tell people if there are
any places on the internet where, where they can
find your work?
Um, THE easiest stuff, I guess, is my scholar
page. You can also, um, I've got a website,
um, I think it's called this, um. I think
that's it. Um, MY own, uh, so you can
find a whole bunch of my stuff there, but
mostly in terms of this kind of work, it's
on my Google scholar. Um, I just, the thing
is, I work in a huge number of fields.
I work in what we've been talking about today.
I also work in computer science theory. I work
in a field called stochastic thermodynamics. Analyzing the stochastic
thermodynamics of computers like the one in your head
right now, you call it your brain, or the
one that we're, you know, the other very similar
computers that we're right now conversing over. Um, I've
got other bodies of work where I'm looking at
foundations of math. I have, I work on very,
very many things. I'm still doing a little bit
of machine learning way back like 40 or 50
years ago. No, no, not that long. Um, 40
years ago, I was actually one of the original
people doing machine learning. Before I frankly got bored
of it. Um, I got bored of it and
I was also actually kicked out because I came
up with things called the no free lunch theorems.
And people did not like those, um, it was
pretty vicious. Um, BUT any case, so I've been
working on all these kinds of things. So what
we're talking about today, you can find it on
my scholar, Google Scholar, but it's it's um buried
in with all these other kinds of papers as
well.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
pleasure to talk with you.
Great. It's been, uh, uh, really fun to, uh,
interact, to have the conversation. Thank you very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun Sergoro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punterrumani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti
Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.